C++: Add more documentation about dataflow through indirections (#14524)
github/codeql: docs/codeql/codeql-language-guides/advanced-dataflow-scenarios-cpp.rst

Advanced dataflow scenarios for C/C++
======================================

Data flow for C and C++ distinguish between the value of a pointer and the value of what the pointer points to. We call this the "indirection" of the pointer. Tracking the pointer and its indirection as separate entities is important for precise dataflow, but it may mean that you do not get the right flow if you select the wrong data flow node. This article demonstrates various scenarios where it is important to consider whether data flow should be computed on the value of the pointer or its indirection.

For almost all situations we only need to instantiate a dataflow configuration and specify our sources and sinks, and dataflow will handle everything for us.

> However, when a write to a field is not visible to CodeQL (for example because it happens in a function whose definition is not in the database) we need to track the qualifier, and tell the dataflow library that it is okay to transfer from flow from the qualifier to the field access. This is done by adding an ``isAdditionalFlowStep`` predicate to the dataflow module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, when a write to a field is not visible to CodeQL (for example because it happens in a function whose definition is not in the database) we need to track the qualifier, and tell the dataflow library that it is okay to transfer flow from the qualifier to the field access. This is done by adding an ``isAdditionalFlowStep`` predicate to the dataflow module.
```

When adding additional flow steps involving pointers one needs to be careful about whether the dataflow step should flow from the pointer or its indirection. Similarly, care must be taken to decide whether the additional step should target a pointer or its indirection.

In the dual situation where a read of a field is not visible to CodeQL, the dataflow library's "implicit read" mechanism can be used to achieve the right flow.

The setup
---------

Consider the following scenario: We have a two structs, each containing two fields, and we have two types of ways of getting user input, and two places that data can end up in:

.. code-block:: cpp

  struct A {
    const int *p;
    int x;
  };

  struct B {
    A *a;
    int y;
  };

  void sink(int);
  int user_input();
  void write_user_input_to(void *);

>   void read_data(const void *);

Reviewer: This is a lot to take in, and we don't actually use all of it right away.  Can we consider moving the definitions of `A` and `B` to the block where they are first used?

Also `write_user_input_to` and `read_data` are, I think, introduced inline before they are used so are perhaps redundant here?

Author: I agree. In 3de32e813b5e5fa46fc9990a86b4dae8503f472d I've reworded it so that it only introduces `user_input` and `sink`. Does that improve the situation?

Reviewer: Yep, I'm much happier with that.

I think when I read a code block I expect to be able to understand what is going on in it without reading ahead [far] - that's why the introduction of `A` and `B` "too early" were bothering me.

:+1:

A regular dataflow query such as the following query

.. code-block:: ql

  /**
  * @kind path-problem
  */

  import semmle.code.cpp.dataflow.new.DataFlow
  import Flow::PathGraph

  module Config implements DataFlow::ConfigSig {
    predicate isSource(DataFlow::Node source) {
      source.asExpr().(Call).getTarget().hasName("user_input")
    }

    predicate isSink(DataFlow::Node sink) {
      exists(Call call |
        call.getTarget().hasName("sink") and
        sink.asExpr() = call.getAnArgument()
      )
    }
  }

  module Flow = DataFlow::Global<Config>;

  from Flow::PathNode source, Flow::PathNode sink
  where Flow::flowPath(source, sink)
  select sink.getNode(), source, sink, "Flow from user input to sink!"

> will catch most things á la

Reviewer: > á la

We should probably rephrase this to something more "basic English".

Author: Good idea. I've replaced it with `such as` in 3de32e813b5e5fa46fc9990a86b4dae8503f472d. Is that better?

.. code-block:: cpp

  void fill_structure(B* b, const int* pu) {
    // ...
    b->a->p = pu;
  }

  void process_structure(const B* b) {
    sink(*b->a->p);
  }

  void get_and_process() {
    int u = user_input();
    B* b = (B*)malloc(sizeof(B));
    // ...
    fill_structure(b, &u);
    // ...
    process_structure(b);
    free(b);
  }

This is simple to match because we see:
  1. User input starts at ``user_input()`` and flows into ``fill_structure``.
  2. The data is written to the object ``b`` with access path ``[a, p]``.
  3. The object ``b`` flows out of ``fill_structure`` and into ``process_structure``.

>   4. The access path ``[a, p]`` is read in ``process_structure`` and the value ends up in the sink.

Author: We could definitely do that. I wanted to convey the fact that the "standard thing" doesn't just work for simple things where we store an integer in a field and later read it out, but also handles the fact that we're storing a pointer to something and later dereference it (because that was a misconception we had to explain to Microsoft in the past).

>   4. The access path ``[a, p]`` is read in ``process_structure`` and the value ends up in the sink.

Reviewer: I see your point.  Happy with this as it is.

Flow from a qualifier to a field access
---------------------------------------

However, sometimes the writes or reads are not visible to CodeQL (for example, because the implementation of the function isn’t included in the database), and so dataflow won't be able to match up all stores with reads, and thus you don't get the result you want. For example, consider the following example:

.. code-block:: cpp

  void write_user_input_to(void*);
  void use_value(int);
  void* malloc(unsigned long);

  struct U {
    const int* p;
    int x;
  };

  void process_user_data(const int* p) {
    // ...
    use_value(*p);
  }

  void get_and_process_user_input_v2() {
    U* u = (U*)malloc(sizeof(U));
    write_user_input_to(u);
    process_user_data(u->p);
    free(u);
  }

> Here, flow starts at the outgoing argument of ``write_user_input_to(...)`` and proceeds to ``u->p``. However, because CodeQL has not observed a write to p prior to the read ``u->p``, dataflow will stop at ``u``. In order to convince CodeQL to proceed we need to add an additional flow step through field reads like so:

Reviewer: > Here, flow starts at the outgoing argument of ``write_user_input_to(...)``

I doesn't though, because you haven't introduced `write_user_input_to` into `isSource` yet.  I think we should consider moving the QL below that adds the source and sink (but perhaps not the additional flow step) to just above this paragraph?

Author: That's a good point. I've tried to reorganize things in d6ccd63ed2db16b4c47f298bf00d0bcb64c9142c so that the relevant `isSource` is mentioned first. Does that improve the readability?

Reviewer: Yes, much better!

.. code-block:: ql

  /**
  * @kind path-problem
  */

  import semmle.code.cpp.dataflow.new.DataFlow
  import Flow::PathGraph

  module Config implements DataFlow::ConfigSig {
    predicate isSource(DataFlow::Node source) {
      exists(Call call |
        call.getTarget().hasName("write_user_input_to") and
        source.asDefiningArgument() = call.getArgument(0)
      )
    }

    predicate isSink(DataFlow::Node sink) {
      exists(Call call |
        call.getTarget().hasName("use_value") and
        sink.asExpr() = call.getAnArgument()
      )
    }

    predicate isAdditionalFlowStep(DataFlow::Node n1, DataFlow::Node n2) {
      exists(FieldAccess fa |
        n1.asIndirectExpr() = fa.getQualifier() and
        n2.asIndirectExpr() = fa

>       )

Author: I've added a small comment about this in 0a71705dfe5f2fc73d37e1f05a2fe9ae99504ccd. Let me know if you think we should actually do the optimization you suggested instead of simply mentioning it in the prose.

>       )

Reviewer: The added comment is definitely good.  I would be tempted to implement it in the code as well (because people love to copy-paste code from tutorials), but I can see that there's a design decision involved in whether you're matching a type name or field or whatever so it isn't one size fits all.

>       )

Reviewer: I don't have strong opinions about this though.  It's fine as it is (now).

      exists(FieldAccess fa |
        n1.asIndirectExpr() = fa.getQualifier() and
        n2.asExpr() = fa
      )
    }
  }

  module Flow = DataFlow::Global<Config>;

  from Flow::PathNode source, Flow::PathNode sink
  where Flow::flowPath(source, sink)
  select sink.getNode(), source, sink, "Flow from user input to sink!"

And with that query the flow is identified.

Specifying implicit reads
-------------------------

The previous section demonstrated how to add flow from qualifiers to field accesses because a source implicitly tainted all the fields of a struct. This section considers the opposite scenario: A specific field is being tainted, and we want to find any place that may read from this object, including any place that reads an unknown set of fields.

To set the stage, consider the following scenario:

.. code-block:: cpp

  struct A {
    const int *p;
    int x;
  };

  struct B {
    A *a;
    int z;
  };

  int user_input();
  void read_data(const void *);
  void *malloc(size_t);

  void get_input_and_use_data() {
    B b;
    b.a = (A *)malloc(sizeof(A));
    b.a->x = user_input();
    // ...

>     use_data(&b);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    read_data(&b);
```
I think `use_data` and `read_data` are references to the same thing?

Author: Oops. Indeed they are. I had to fix a few other references, so I did it in c5307bed2b3c691c793b19218afe32b26b96d191 instead of accepting your commit suggestion.

    free(b.a);
  }

We write a user-controlled value into the object ``b`` at the access path ``[a, x]``. Afterwards, ``b`` is passed to ``use_data`` which we assume we don't have the definition of in the database. We now want to track this user-input flowing into ``use_data``.

> The dataflow library actually has a specific tool to handle this scenario, and thus we don't need to add any additional flow steps using ``isAdditionalFlowStep`` to handle this. Instead, we have to tell the dataflow library that ``use_data`` may implicitly read the data from the object that it has been passed. To do that, we implement ``allowImplicitRead`` in our dataflow module:

Author: Good idea. I've reformulated this in c4075b3ec7d2889e02392c5be401edb20fa0ac21.

(The `read_data` / `use_data` was fixed in c5307bed2b3c691c793b19218afe32b26b96d191.)

.. code-block:: ql

  /**
  * @kind path-problem
  */

  import semmle.code.cpp.dataflow.new.DataFlow
  import Flow::PathGraph

  module Config implements DataFlow::ConfigSig {
    predicate isSource(DataFlow::Node source) {
      exists(Call call |
        call.getTarget().hasName("user_input") and
        source.asExpr() = call
      )
    }

    predicate isSink(DataFlow::Node sink) {
      exists(Call call |
        call.getTarget().hasName("read_data") and
        sink.asIndirectExpr() = call.getAnArgument()
      )
    }

    predicate allowImplicitRead(DataFlow::Node n, DataFlow::ContentSet cs) {
      isSink(n) and
      cs.getAReadContent().(DataFlow::FieldContent).getField().hasName(["a", "x"])
    }
  }

  module Flow = DataFlow::Global<Config>;

  from Flow::PathNode source, Flow::PathNode sink
  where Flow::flowPath(source, sink)
  select sink.getNode(), source, sink, "Flow from user input to sink!"

> The ``allowImplicitRead`` predicate specifies that if we're at a node that satisfies ``isSink`` then we're allowed to assume that there is an implicit read of a field named ``a`` or a field named ``x``. This gets us the flow we are interested in because the dataflow library now will see:

Author: Yeah, we can definitely do that 👍

  1. User input starts at ``user_input()``.
  2. The data flowing into ``b`` with access path ``[a, x]``.
  3. The data flowing to the indirection of ``&b`` (i.e., the object ``b``).

>   4. An implicit read of the field ``x`` followed by an implicit read of the field ``a``.

Author: Yep, I like that change 👍

For almost all situations we only need to instantiate a dataflow configuration and specify our sources and sinks, and dataflow will handle everything for us.

However, when a write to a field is not visible to CodeQL (for example because it happens in a function whose definition is not in the database) we need to track the qualifier, and tell the dataflow library that it is okay to transfer flow from the qualifier to the field access. This is done by adding an ``isAdditionalFlowStep`` predicate to the dataflow module.

When adding additional flow steps involving pointers one needs to be careful about whether the dataflow step should flow from the pointer or its indirection. Similarly, care must be taken to decide whether the additional step should target a pointer or its indirection.

> In the dual situation where a read of a field is not visible to CodeQL, the dataflow library's "implicit read" mechanism can be used to achieve the right flow.

Author: ```suggestion
In contrast, if the read of a field is not visible to CodeQL, you can add an ``allowImplicitRead`` predicate to model the data flow.
```

The setup
---------

Consider the following scenario: We have data coming out of ``user_input()`` and we want to figure out if that data can ever reach an argument of `sink`.

.. code-block:: cpp

  void sink(int);
  int user_input();

A regular dataflow query such as the following query

.. code-block:: ql

  /**
  * @kind path-problem
  */

  import semmle.code.cpp.dataflow.new.DataFlow
  import Flow::PathGraph

  module Config implements DataFlow::ConfigSig {
    predicate isSource(DataFlow::Node source) {
      source.asExpr().(Call).getTarget().hasName("user_input")
    }

    predicate isSink(DataFlow::Node sink) {
      exists(Call call |
        call.getTarget().hasName("sink") and
        sink.asExpr() = call.getAnArgument()
      )
    }
  }

  module Flow = DataFlow::Global<Config>;

  from Flow::PathNode source, Flow::PathNode sink
  where Flow::flowPath(source, sink)
  select sink.getNode(), source, sink, "Flow from user input to sink!"

> will catch most things such as

Author: This is meant to refer to the subsequent code block. So I think you meant to suggest a colon instead?

```suggestion
will catch most things such as:
```

However, sometimes the writes or reads are not visible to CodeQL (for example, because the implementation of the function isn't included in the database), and so dataflow won't be able to match up all stores with reads, and thus you don't get the result you want. For example, consider an alternative setup where our source of data starts as the outgoing argument of a function `write_user_input_to`. We can model this setup in the dataflow library using the following ``isSource``:

.. code-block:: ql

  predicate isSource(DataFlow::Node source) {
    exists(Call call |
      call.getTarget().hasName("write_user_input_to") and
      source.asDefiningArgument() = call.getArgument(0)
    )
  }

This would match the call to ``write_user_input_to`` in the following example:

.. code-block:: cpp

  void write_user_input_to(void*);
  void use_value(int);
  void* malloc(unsigned long);

  struct U {
    const int* p;
    int x;
  };

  void process_user_data(const int* p) {
    // ...
    use_value(*p);
  }

  void get_and_process_user_input_v2() {
    U* u = (U*)malloc(sizeof(U));
    write_user_input_to(u);
    process_user_data(u->p);
    free(u);
  }

> Flow now starts at the outgoing argument of ``write_user_input_to(...)`` and proceeds to ``u->p``. However, because CodeQL has not observed a write to ``p`` prior to the read ``u->p``, dataflow will stop at ``u``. In order to convince CodeQL to proceed we need to add an additional flow step through field reads like so:

Author: I've converted this one to a numbered list in 1b1a78bf044f6a7b62c79978af343de1127b8c0d. I'll go through the other ones and see if there are similar opportunities.

I also incorporated your suggested changes to the unchanged parts of the paragraph. Thank you!

> Flow now starts at the outgoing argument of ``write_user_input_to(...)`` and proceeds to ``u->p``. However, because CodeQL has not observed a write to ``p`` prior to the read ``u->p``, dataflow will stop at ``u``. In order to convince CodeQL to proceed we need to add an additional flow step through field reads like so:

Author: f6b1d66167289f961bca4097397dba785c6fdddb was another meaningful change I could find like the above. I don't think it makes sense to convert any of the other paragraphs to numbered lists, though. Thanks for the suggestion! 🙇

      )
    }

    predicate isAdditionalFlowStep(DataFlow::Node n1, DataFlow::Node n2) {
      exists(FieldAccess fa |
        n1.asIndirectExpr() = fa.getQualifier() and
        n2.asIndirectExpr() = fa
      )
    }
  }

  module Flow = DataFlow::Global<Config>;

  from Flow::PathNode source, Flow::PathNode sink
  where Flow::flowPath(source, sink)
  select sink.getNode(), source, sink, "Flow from user input to sink!"

Notice how the ``isSource`` and ``isSink`` are as expected: we're looking for flow that starts at the outgoing parameter of ``write_user_input_to(...)``, and ends up as an argument to ``isSink``. The interesting part is the addition of ``isAdditionalFlow`` which specifies an additional flow step from the qualifier of a ``FieldAccess`` to the result of the access.

In a real query the ``isAdditionalFlowStep`` step would be restricted in various ways to make sure that it doesn't add too much flow (since flow from a field qualifier to the field access in general will generate a lot of spurious flow). For example, one could restrict ``fa`` to be a field access that targets a particular field, or a field access of a field that's defined in a certain ``struct`` type.

> We have an important choice here: Should the relationship between ``n2`` and ``fa`` be implemented using ``asExpr`` or ``asIndirectExpr``? 

Author: Good idea. I've fixed this in 44e214b9337f300b1ba802f7279aa9af2abb2546.

.. _using-asIndirectExpr:

Using asIndirectExpr
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If we use ``n2.asIndirectExpr() = fa`` we specify that flow moves to what ``fa`` points to. This allows dataflow to flow through a later dereference, which is exactly what we need to to flow from ``p`` to ``*p`` in ``process_user_data``.

> Thus we get the required flow path.

Author: Yes, it's referring to the previous example. I've hopefully made this more explicit in c04546da98052d0a9b15bfba4233b4b90eeeb89d with the use of captions 🤞.

.. code-block:: cpp

  void write_user_input_to(void*);
  void use_pointer(int*);
  void* malloc(unsigned long);

  struct U {
    const int* p;
    int x;
  };

  void process_user_data(const int* p) {
    // ...
    use_pointer(p);
  }

  void get_and_process_user_input_v2() {
    U* u = (U*)malloc(sizeof(U));
    write_user_input_to(u);
    process_user_data(u->p);
    free(u);
  }

The only difference between the previous example and this one is that our data ends up in a call to ``use_pointer`` which takes an ``int*`` instead of an ``int`` as an argument. Since our ``isAdditionalFlowStep`` implementation already steps to the indirection of the ``FieldAccess`` we're already tracking what the field points to. So we can find this flow by using ``sink.asIndirectExpr()`` to specify that the data we're interested in tracking is the value that ends up being pointed to by an argument that is passed to ``use_pointer``:

.. code-block:: ql

  predicate isSink(DataFlow::Node sink) {
    exists(Call call |
      call.getTarget().hasName("use_pointer") and
      sink.asIndirectExpr() = call.getAnArgument()
    )
  }

.. _using-asExpr:

Using asExpr
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Alternatively, this flow could also be tracked by:

Author: I've added the named code blocks as you suggested [here](https://github.com/github/codeql/pull/14524#discussion_r1363727847) and hopefully used that to make it more clear in c04546da98052d0a9b15bfba4233b4b90eeeb89d which code snippet it is referring to 🤞.

      )
    }
  }

  module Flow = DataFlow::Global<Config>;

  from Flow::PathNode source, Flow::PathNode sink
  where Flow::flowPath(source, sink)
  select sink.getNode(), source, sink, "Flow from user input to sink!"

When we get to ``u->p`` the additional step transfers flow from what the qualifier points to, to the result of the ``FieldAccess``. After this, dataflow proceeds to ``p`` in ``use_pointer(p)`` and since we specified in our ``isSink`` that we're interested in the value of the argument, our dataflow analysis finds a result.

Passing the address of a variable to ``use_pointer``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Consider an alternative scenario where ``U`` contains a single ``int`` data, and we pass the address of data to ``use_pointer`` as seen below.

.. code-block:: cpp

  void write_user_input_to(void*);
  void use_pointer(int*);
  void* malloc(unsigned long);

  struct U {
    int data;
    int x;
  };

  void process_user_data(int data) {
    // ...
    use_pointer(&data);
  }

  void get_and_process_user_input_v2() {
    U* u = (U*)malloc(sizeof(U));
    write_user_input_to(u);
    process_user_data(u->data);
    free(u);
  }

> Since data is no longer a pointer our ``isAdditionalFlowStep`` doesn't make any sense because it specifies flow to the indirection of the field (and an integer does not have any indirections). So there is no choice about whether to taint the value of the field or its indirection: it has to be the value. However, since we pass the address of ``data`` to ``use_pointer`` the tainted data is what is pointed to by the argument of ``use_pointer`` (since the data pointed to by ``&data`` is exactly ``data``). So to handle this case we need a mix of the two situations above:

Author: Indeed this is technically a complex paragraph. I've tried to clear up the explanation in a36d432184cf015f81ea2f3cb606f4e2530e9c18.

In a real query the ``isAdditionalFlowStep`` step would be restricted in various ways to make sure that it doesn't add too much flow (since flow from a field qualifier to the field access in general will generate a lot of spurious flow). For example, one could restrict ``fa`` to be a field access that targets a particular field, or a field access of a field that's defined in a certain ``struct`` type.

> We have an important choice here: Should ``n2`` be the node corresponding to the pointer value of ``fa`` or the indirection of ``fa`` (i.e., what ``fa`` points to)?

Reviewer 2: We avoid using this shorthand.

```suggestion
We have an important choice here: Should ``n2`` be the node corresponding to the pointer value of ``fa`` or the indirection of ``fa`` (that is, what ``fa`` points to)?
```

    free(u);
  }

Since the ``data`` field is now an ``int`` instead of an ``int*`` the field no longer has any indirections, and so the use of ``asIndirectExpr`` in ``isAdditionalFlowStep`` no longer makes sense (and so the additional step will have no results). So there is no choice about whether to taint the value of the field or its indirection: it has to be the value.

However, since we pass the address of ``data`` to ``use_pointer`` on line 12 the tainted value is what is pointed to by the argument of ``use_pointer`` (since the value pointed to by ``&data`` is exactly ``data``). So to handle this case we need a mix of the two situations above:

>   1. We need to taint the value of the field as described the :ref:`Using asExpr <using-asExpr>` section.

Reviewer 2: Missing word - I think this was missing in my last suggestion for this line :disappointed:

```suggestion
  1. We need to taint the value of the field as described in the :ref:`Using asExpr <using-asExpr>` section.
```

    free(b.a);
  }

> What happens here is the following:

Reviewer 2: Suggest:

```suggestion
In this example, the data flows as follows:
```
